And Priscilla Jebelis.
Milo.
Well, it could be, but not of this quality.
That was Don's point, that ten years ago there weren't a hundred bindings of this quality that could be got together in this country.
um for the exhibition are you saying that american mining is really a creature in the last 10 years longer than that but in the past 10 years it's grown by leaps and bounds a creature of this quality yes a creature of this quality surely it's just gotten real a lot more sophisticated
in a row in a decade.
How do you explain that?
Hard work.
Is it an explosion of talent, blossoming forth all at the same time?
I think that probably the people, a whole lot of the people that are exhibiting here would have been exhibiting in that show that didn't happen 10 years ago.
But they're just better now.
It seems to me that you're out there, too.
Yeah.
I don't think you existed 10 years ago.
Not like now, but we were there 10 years ago.
But you were just starting.
What year were you in Paris studying?
What was the year?
75.
75, 76.
So 10 years ago would have been 81, so you would have been only binding for four or five years after studying.
Is this what you do professionally?
You bind?
How does one become a binder?
Good question.
I mean, you certainly must have artistic... Well, people come to make this in lots of different directions.
I mean, there's not... But what about you, Don?
How did you...?
I came... I majored in sculpture and art.
in California, San Jose State University Art School.
And after I couldn't make any money doing that, after I got out of school, I just got jobs.
And one of them was a, I repaired books at the Stanford Library.
This was a job, you know, just a dumb job.
I mean, it required no skill.
I told you how to use the masking tape.
But I kind of liked it.
Yeah, it was kind of fun.
It was kind of mindless.
But anyway, I figured out that there was a way to make books that was not destructive, which is what...
consider what I was doing at this library.
You know, I was like putting terrible materials and stuff on books.
So I kind of got into it from a concern for conservation of the materials almost, which is not what I'm interested in now.
I remember this as a person whose primary interest is in the text, in the book.
Yeah, in the literature.
Yeah, all of this fascination for the binding is really
But has there ever been, for you,
I mean, the book, I mean, at what point is the book, the book, the binding, the binding, or do they become... Yeah, sure.
People ask that question a lot.
I think that, for me, I mean, I can only say for me, but... But the binding, the binding of the book needs to be...
Good luck to everybody.
Some people decide to take a real modest role in the making of this object.
Some blinders want to take a modest role in the making
finely crafted object that is the whole book, right?
And so those people, I think, I mean, they were there tonight, you know, the books were there tonight.
They tended to be quieter and, you know, more like decorative.
I mean, as opposed to making some sort of aesthetic statement, they were
were designed to show off the text and all that stuff.
And they were there.
But there's other approaches, and I just take it.
Well, if we're going to talk about books, then we have to have a great book collector, Champagne, right?
Rotoroo is one of the greatest collectors of books that ever lived.
They rest in peace, right?
The Rotoroo collection was bought by Rosenbach in 21.
It was the greatest book collection ever to leave France.
R-O-E-D-E-R-E-R, Louis Audraire.
He owned all the original UD drawings for the tables of La Fontaine, and he owned over 130 or 140
original drawings by Fragonard for a... That's why she wanted his champagne.
He had to mix it like champagne.
That were never published because the drawings were so free.
Because Fragonard could be as modern as Manet or Goya.
And the...
The brush, the pencil lines were so free and so unstructured that he was told by his publisher that they could not be transformed into engravings.
So the book was never made.
But the drawings for the book were in the Roderick Collection and Arthur Houghtonbottom from John Fleming.
And he paid $30,000 or $40,000.
That's a few years ago, too.
Yeah, it was in 53 or 54, but even still he got the bargain of the century.
No, Houghton shot a mile of the bargain of the century, but this was close.
Anyway, he had great books, really great books, in great bindings from the French tradition.
Did you have a sense of this tradition when you became a biker or did you just become a biker?
Yeah, I knew that there was that tradition.
That's one thing I really liked about it.
There was a feeling to be a sculptor, you know, like none of that.
If there is any of this tradition, I kind of try and bury it.
Try and do something really
off the wall and you know something that nobody's ever even thought of before and that's what that was about as i understood it with binding there was this long tradition and i mean you understood this or you appreciated this when you became a bind
Do you think he has absorbed the tradition?
Absolutely.
I mean, he's taken the best of the French tradition.
And my problem with the contemporary French binding is that they have not moved into the post-war period in a big way, whereas I think Don and one or two other American libraries have, in fact, brought binding into
the same world that, I don't know, Jasper Johns or de Kooning or, you know... Can you be specific at all?
How have they go this?
Well, instead of... Yeah, okay.
Around 1930 and 1940, French Binders started using the front and back cover of the book
to execute their designs on as if it were more or less a canvas rather than a book with a front and back cover on a spine.
In other words, the design element, what they were going to put on the binding went
When you opened the book up, it went across the two covers.
But they were still pretty much, they started to do that, but they were still pretty much visually wedded to that book form of front cover, back cover, and spine.
Is this something that somebody like myself would notice?
Can't miss it.
Okay.
You saw the stuff side by side.
You can't miss it.
But what's going on now in Don's Bindings is a three-dimensional sort of thing.
In other words, the covers of the book are no longer the covers of a book only.
They are that, but they're more than that.
They are the canvas or the base on which to make an artistic statement.
Do you think that, and this is where we get into the three-dimensional setting,
My question is, does this exceed the definition of a binding?
Is it no longer a binding and is it listed as a matter of fact to itself?
something that we appreciate in its own merits, apart from the text.
And again, I'm a book person, so I'm asking this question.
No question in my mind.
Are we talking about books?
Are we talking about structures?
And they're both fine.
I want to know what I'm talking about.
No question in my mind that it's, besides being a book, it's also an object.
And the binding can be appreciated by itself, but a binding on a great illuminated manuscript can also be appreciated by itself.
An illumination is not
and that is, in fact, there are many bindings like that.
And when you look at a Pavlou binding or a Goyer binding, you are appreciating the binding just as much
for what it is rather than the fact that it covers the book that may happen to be valuable.
So I don't see that what's happening now is a break in the tradition.
I just see it increased.
I don't think it's a break.
What I was going to say before is that at least for me, I guess I can't really talk about it.
too much about what other people are doing, but I just take a pretty active part in the making.
I see the thing that gets put in a box and sent off to you, the collector, as a real integrated unit.
And so the binding is a part of it, but I think that I probably take a more active part in making that object, that whole unit, when it gets put in that box.
Let's take a case.
I'm a client.
I send you a book.
Does the binding evolve?
Do you read text?
Do you have a reading experience with it?
Does it affect you in such a way that you are?
move to create the binding that you did to create?
You know, it's not the metaphysical, but the creative process that goes into the making of the writing.
For one part of that.
Many, many, many books.
Tell me what happens.
I'm curious about what happens.
Right.
Usually, books that I get, I don't know why, maybe it's the way books are nowadays, are with images in them.
They're illustrated in some kind of way.
You know, they're in etchings or photographs or something.
So these are the things that people weren't bound to.
Well, let me just add that that's a French tradition.
I mean, the French have always thought that any books with original graphic art and the original works of art in the books should, in fact, have a work of art on the outside of the book, or one of a kind as our divining.
That's not exactly what we saw here tonight.
All of my books that were there, that's what you saw.
There were all books illustrated with original graphics, that is, the books he had original art in it, and all the books that Don, except for the one that he made himself, which has original art in it, because it's his own book, his own paintings on the inside, that certainly all were, I mean, one was illustrated with lithographs by Picasso, another one with
Do you think that's kind of a working definition then, that ideally the spine binding should house a work of art?
In the past, let's just say that's the French tradition.
It doesn't make a whole lot of sense to me to put
as much energy as it takes to make a binding like most of them who were there tonight on something like that that's not a nifty thing doesn't mean it has to be worth a lot of money but it has to be it doesn't make so let's go back to the process
When I get a book, like I say, usually, and I can't think of, but a couple of things.
That's a pain, but it will focus on you.
Most of the time, the books are Elstrand.
So there is literature, you know.
Usually, not even always.
I mean, usually there's visual stuff to look at in the books.
And there's also usually literature.
And so if there is literature, I try and read it.
I think it's in the language that I can read.
I try and rent a movie.
If it isn't, I mean, you know, whatever.
However I can get it, you know, and get what I can get.
I call Priscilla.
What's this about?
You know, I do something.
No, but I mean, it's real.
I mean, I can't read everything in check or something.
But, so I do that.
And then I look at the illustrations.
The guy that wrote the book started it all, I assume.
And then the guy that illustrated the book, he took a part, right?
He took an active part and he made pictures or images.
some sort now it's my turn to take the two parts that they took absorb that and make another part so that's what i do and sometimes it's i like that i kind of like
to take a big part.
What makes him one of the best?
If not the best.
This doesn't really work.
Let me just make sure it is.
It's working right along.
I wrote someplace once, and I wish I could remember what the source of the float is.
In describing the Liv d'Artiste, a book with original graphic art by a major artist, someone said the true definition was each page astonishes and delights.
When you see one of Dawn's findings, it's always an astonishment and a delight.
Same can be said about the binding, always.
And it's always, oh, this is terrific.
I wasn't expecting this.
I never thought of this.
It expands.
He says he calls you and he asks you for ideas.
No, he asks me what the book's about.
But then it's this book that says... But then when you see it, you are astonished and delighted.
Yes, because it's a way of looking at the book and thinking about the text and the art that's in it that I never thought about before, or that no one else would be able to think about before.
In other words, what he has done is take the text and the art that's in it and interpret it and spun it through his mind.
And what comes out is a form of communication, which our art is, but it's a different spin on it that...
I hadn't thought of before, and it is always, and that spin is always the astonishment of the light.
It's never boring.
It's always adding to my understanding of what the book is.
Okay, a couple of questions.
Number one, is this in the franchise about the great book writing, number one?
Yeah.
Absolutely, yeah.
What distinguishes this American book writing?
This explosion of creativity we saw tonight was just celebrated in this show.
I don't know, but I have to guess, I have to guess that... I want to know what... Yeah, I think that just the way the center of the art world changed from Paris to New York after the war, absolutely.
Note that that...
is for sure.
After World War II, no one went to Paris to paint.
Everyone went to New York.
Jackson Pollock, Jasper Johns, David Hockney.
And not just Americans, but people came to New York in the 50s the way they used to go to Paris in the 20s.
And I think since the book world has always been called the tale of the dog in the outworld, that finally, you know,
40 years later, 30 years later, the book world's finally catching up.
But you need a lot of people doing it for a few people to really rise to the top.
I mean, a lot of people have got to be out there doing it and exchanging ideas with one another and seeing each other's work.
That might be why it's gotten better.
in the last 10 years maybe it's really you know there's a what do you call it a quantum you know it feeds on itself quicker you know last year than it did in the first three years you know what i mean and it's because i mean i know for my for my own self
Living where I live now, which is in Western Massachusetts, where there's a whole lot of people making books, finders, and printers, you know, that might be a story in itself.
The Pioneer Valley certainly is.
And look, what you've got there is an amazing concentration.
I mean, you've got Leonard Baskin, who's 50 years old.
He's been making books at this time.
He's been printing.
And when he started, Harold McGrath was printing.
Harold's 80 years old?
85 years old?
No, I can't believe it.
He is.
Alan's having a big, I think he's been printing.
He's 50 years printing.
Oh, Leonard's printing.
No, Harold's printing.
Harold's printing?
But he printed before that for Fritz Eichenberg and Furl.
So it's not 80 years.
No, not 80 years of printing, but isn't he 80 years old?
I think he's 80.
He's pretty well-deserved for 80 years old.
Well, I think Alan told me he was, yeah.
Because Al was having a birthday party for him.
He's old, I'm telling you.
But in any event, when Harold first started printing, there was no one else printing up there.
I mean, there was no one else doing that sort of thing.
What were you two kind of, because of this community out there?
Pretty much.
Yeah, I was in San Francisco.
A lot of personal things happened.
I mean, horses and all that stuff.
I needed to get out of town.
Yeah, but I needed to get out of town.
I wanted to get out of town.
But what happened was I... That wouldn't have been my first choice if I had that out of your shoes.
You didn't go it that way.
Well, what you do is you get in your car and you start driving until you get someplace.
And I just, it wasn't that random, but I just, I took this big car track.
And I did talks, and I talked at the Gloria's house one night.
And this guy, David Bourbeau, in East Hampton, Massachusetts, was there and he said,
Come on up if you're on the road and, you know, come on up.
So I did.
And he said, hey, this is all right.
And he had this party for me.
And he called, he called just people in East Hampton.
East Hampton.
Where did I know the area?
Okay, he called the people just off the street, almost.
And there was all these people I've heard of that were making books, right?
Yeah, Grave Perot came, and Claudia Cohen, and Sarah Creighton, and all these people, and Carol Blinn, and, you know, one party.
And it was like these guys were just going home from work, walking down the street, and there they were.
I have to tell you, the first time I brought, the first time I brought Adrian to your house, I brought this very, very, very sophisticated European collection to Donham to dance for a potluck dinner about four years ago.
And we pulled in from New York.
We had lunch that day at John Flemington.
Rosenbach's old place.
And we drove up from New York and we pulled into Ashfield.
And he got out of the car.
It was an October evening.
And he looked around and he said, this is the America one reads about that I never thought had existed.
And we went in and there were all these people making books, all these artists.
And he just looked around, and I said, this could be a story.
And I said, now look, this isn't the Ritz, huh?
And he said, this is wonderful.
Right now, it's a really good story.
It's a really Yankee, I mean, as opposed to French or English.
It's a real American.
It's a real American force.
It's not French anymore or French anymore.
It's like we went to those places.
We learned what we could from it.
The energy is here.
Is it significant that this show was in Paris first?
Only in that this was an exchange.
The French bibliophile club sent over an exhibition to the Goliath Club in December of 87, an exhibition of contemporary French book findings.
With the idea that three or four years later, the Americans would send over a reciprocal show.
Not knowing what it is.
Yes, but the formats of the catalog were the same.
It's the same trim size, same format.
It was an absolute direct exchange that was organized by the Grolier with the French equivalent of the Grolier.
So that... Did theirs open in New York first and then go first?
Yes, right.
So it's just exactly the right.
Just a flip.
Only the brilliant, I have to say that it was probably Bob Nykirk that put it together.
I mean, you know, the librarian or the girl who died.
I have to suspect that it was Bob Poole who was the engineer in foot behind it.
Bob was always interested in book arts, by the way.
That was one of his stories.
And he certainly liked American, and he certainly liked finding.
Can I have another glass of water, please?
Yes.
I got it.
It's an interesting story, isn't it?
It hasn't been written yet.
No, it hasn't.
Everyone is so busy writing about the New York art scene, and all the New York artists, and Barbara Cooper, and Jane Schaubel.
It's definitely a story.
But I think it's the angle part.
Yeah, and I don't know how to help you there.
but I really get what I really have to feel is what this, and I, because I'm not, I don't know bindings, but, but if you were to take, how many, are they there, a hundred and six?
A hundred and six.
If you were to take these 106 bindings and put them next to 106 part bindings,
Would you know immediately which was the American and which was the president?
No question.
Yeah.
I could tell in one second.
Don, you could, too.
There's a little bit of crossover.
There's a little bit of French-Canadian.
Yeah.
I heard people say, I asked that woman from Washington.
I think the things that aren't, not all those books have it.
I think that American bindings tend to be just bolder.
They tend to be
like kind of like america is you know it's kind of like brash and it might not be everybody's taste and it might be considered tasteless and there might be lots of things but it's like it's like i i feel like it's
taken bigger steps than maybe were taken before.
You're selling them, so we have to put this in there.
Yeah, but somebody else is buying them.
But someone else already bought the middle one.
But I have to ask myself.
I see it.
It's a pearl.
Steel, steel, silver, rising with a mirror.
I don't know how to open a goddamn thing, and if I wanted to read this play, you know, this thing might poke me in a jar or hit me with a groin or something like that.
You take it off, there's a case that it's what Sinsbury does.
I'm being precise, but it's not just literature, though.
That's the point.
This is an impediment to it.
No, this is adding to your enjoyment and understanding of the Beckett play.
I think so.
Yes, because the play takes place in a tin can.
And the characters are struggling to get out of the silver tube that they live in, which is in fact a crash crash.
So it's a pretty aggressive interpretation of the book, of the text.
It's like America.
It's a little more... So the body becomes a critic in a way.
Indeed.
He's putting his spin on the images that are in the book.
What else can he be?
What else could he do?
A binder could be a binder and not a critic.
I understand.
But if he did that, then you'd have all the books looking alike.
and they'd all be looking like Victorian bindings, that you could switch them, you wouldn't even know.
None of them would relate, you know, they all look the same, they're all very elegant, very wonderful, but you wouldn't know if you're reading Wizard of Oz or, you know, Frankenstein's monster.
So you think that the traditional bookcase is outmoded, it's an inequity, I mean, we take a book up itself, we have to have things, you know,
Dangling things.
No, they've got boxes.
You'd never know looking at the spines what was on the inside.
Never.
So they open up.
Yeah.
You know, you've got these amazing weird things that plopped around and everything.
But they all fit.
They all fit.
And you put them in a box and they look just like your Gutenberg Bible right next to them.
So the guy is an engineer as much as an artist.
Oh, no question.
Sometimes, yeah.
Just to figure these foldings and stuff?
Yeah, sure.
It ain't easy, you know.
Especially in some of the three-dimensional bindings that Don does.
The one on his own book that... Look at that, three-dimensional bindings.
Yes, the binding of sculpture.
It's just a phrase.
I mean, it's a very interesting phrase.
But that was not invented in the United States.
We have to give credit where credit is due.
The French binder Paul Bonnet
first did a sculpt a sculptural binding and they're called um a sculpte um and that was in the 50s and mostly he did them on bronx work interestingly interesting
Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte Sculpte
flat cubist work as three-dimensional, which, in fact, it was.
But no one had ever said in another art form, look, this is what I see there, and this is what I'm doing.
Also, though, the thing is that a binding is, if you don't do anything to it, it's a three-dimensional line.
And it's a kinetic piece of sculpture.
It pops around, you know, and opens and poses and pops up.
You've got to handle it.
Look, one of the most fascinating days I ever spent in my life was with Henry Moore at his place at his farm in England.
And I got the grand tour.
I was with some friends of his.
And there were three of us.
And we spent the whole day looking at all of his vines and all the sculptures, wet rubbers, and, you know, he was making everything.
At the end of the day, we're back
to his house to have tea with him, and he asked the three of us that were sitting there an astonishing question, I thought.
He said, what is the one work of art, the one painting that you would live with for the rest of your life?
If you could only have one, what is the one that you would have?
Now, I was with a French art dealer who said, who deals in impressions paintings, and he said, probably a Derek Boots or some other French painter, which absolutely, yes.
It astonished me because I thought I knew the man, and I thought that he would say Manet, you know.
But he said Derek Boots is another Spanish painting.
Another contemporary dealer, who was a good friend of his, actually named...
I think an English painter, as I recall, from maybe Gainsborough.
And I said, Goya, I happen to love Goya.
But my next question was, who cares what we think?
What's the one picture that you would want?
said well he said it was it's the one painting that's like a sculpture and we all looked at one another and said yes you want to explain that and he said well i'll show you and he came out with a little 12 inch by 12 inch square of uh about
or four inches high, a maquette of the Cezanne bathers, but interpreted as a piece of sculpture.
And he said Cezanne was, in fact, a sculptor.
He just sculpted on canvas.
And he had the sculpture to prove that, in fact... Cezanne made it?
No, he made it.
But it was his interpretation of the Cezanne... So what do you think is one of his old things?
No, he wanted the Suzanne Babis because he always thought of it as a piece of sculpture rather than as a painting.
Well, that's in a way, this is a convoluted saying, that's what a binder does.
He looks at and thinks about what's in the book and
and translates it into his own medium, which is what Henry Moore did.
He translated, or transliterated, I guess, I don't know, translated the Cezanne Bader's into a piece of sculpture, and that's what a binder does.
Then, of course, it's talent.
I mean, at that point, you can have all the translation in the world.
And it don't work.
But you have to have them.
Yeah, the skill.
I might have a feeling in the world for this particular text.
My daughter, my eight-year-old, draws better than I do.
I draw like I'm fine.
But my point is she takes lessons.
What I'm trying to say is however profoundly you feel about something, you still have to have skills and
I think that's why people still go to Europe to study.
Because there's an aesthetic skill that I'm not talking about.
But how to put, I mean, the craft.
I've got a question.
The craft is best.
How much is craft and how much is art?
That's what I'd like to say.
How much of binding is craft and how much is art?
Depends on who the binder is.
To me, because I really love what I learned in France, which was really amazing craftsmanship.
I learned to appreciate it, and I learned to, maybe I can, when I'm 90, achieve that kind of craftsmanship.
I think that for my books, if they're not crafted as good as I can get, I mean, just good, then I'm not happy at all.
So the craft is very important, but I mean, it's really, really important.
and maybe nobody even knows that that sees the stuff you know because half the stuff that i make half the craft is all covered up with all kinds of other stuff what i'm saying is the art can be exquisite yeah well then it sucks there's a lot that comes out that's right that's right that's right that is true it's a really you know it's not like it's not like you know
Jackson Pollock is slapping stuff all over the place.
And, you know, now, everyone, 40 years later, you know, pops off, or some of the Roushenberg stuff is popping off and stuff.
That's where the book-binding tradition, I think, comes in.
Like, there's craftsmanship, and it really counts.
And it's not good enough to have stuff popping off 50 years later.
I would think so.
Well, it's not the money of the thing, but...
But you expect a standard of excellence, which erases... Yeah, so that isn't good enough to have it falling apart.
To me, I mean, to me.
Well, I would think so.
You have to understand that the French book finders never found their own books.
Paul Bonnet was a designer, wasn't he?
Someone else executed them, and someone else did the gilding.
Don not only designed the findings, but he executes them and does the gilding.
It's a major change.
It's a major, major change.
What makes Ansel Adams a great photographer is that his hands are covered with acid, because he did the prints.
That's a real American thing too.
It's not necessarily a real American thing, but it's a real non-French thing.
The sort of French tradition is that lots of people make one book.
There's a guy that sews it, a guy that hears it out of it, a guy that designs it, and there's a guy that does all those decorative stuff.
So it is a craft, a work of craftsmanship at every step of the way.
Yeah.
Because everybody's doing a different...
the guy that he felt was the best guy to produce the binding part of the book.
So he was called a binder.
The binder would have these subs that he would hire out.
A sewer, who was always a woman.
And it's true.
So the book would get sewn outside the shop, come back to the guy's shop,
He would put the covers on it and, you know, do the leather business, figure out what, you know, get the skin, send the skin out to be thin to the right thickness, get the skin back.
He wouldn't do it himself.
And he'd put the, you know, cover the book.
The headbands and the little thing, the woven stuff up here, that would be done by the woman that did the first sewing.
And all that gets done.
And then now you've got this little book that's got no title on it.
It's got no decoration on it.
It's got no sand, no nothing on it.
And now that guy's done.
He's got his job done.
So he now gives it back to Bonnet.
I'm not sure who gets it to it.
But then the gilder gets it, the guy that does all the gold tooling and stuff.
And he takes the drawing that Bonnet has made.
And he translates that into gold lines and colored lines and different colored leathers and all those things.
And then he does all that stuff.
And then he finally gives it a bonnet.
And bonnet stamps the signature on it.
And it's a bonnet vinyl.
And that's the truth.
Because he designed it.
And the other two guys, forget about the woman who sewed it and the guy that killed the leather and all that.
Oh, they get paid, right?
They get paid, right.
But the binder...
The binder slash contractor and the gilder.
So it's just been subbed out every step of the way.
Yeah.
They might get a little initial on the back, possibly.
No, they didn't.
The only one that ever gave credit was Rose Adler.
Rose Adler did, yeah.
But that's because she did the binding herself.
That's right.
They say worsted the insect with bindings ever since all that.
What does that mean?
Little bindings.
Kitsch to the max.
But how come they spent so much money for him?
No one ever went broke, underestimating the taste of the American public.
So, do you think Chagrin A. was a speculator?
No, I think he probably really liked him.
What did he tell him?
Was he young man?
This is not for the record.
Yeah, I don't know.
I don't know him, so I don't know.
I've talked to him.
He's a pretty nice guy.
I have no idea.
He was rather amazed that I asked him to sign the catalog.
He said, oh, we've asked for that.
There you go.
Oh, you know what?
This guy...
Well, you know, a lot of people want to be the executives of their own estates, too.
Yeah, but he wanted the monument now.
He wanted the monument now so he could live with it and love it.
A lot of people want the approbation.
Look, this is the one thing that has happened.
This is the change in the art world that no one seems to have gotten a handle on.
It makes me crazy.
You know, no one seems to get it, and the vulgarity of the art world is wonderful and appalling at the same time.
What has happened is, in the past, in the 19th century, in the 18th century, those people that were patrons of the art, in quotes, whatever that means, you know, you bought a book, you bought a painting, you bought a piece of art,
I was telling people that knew we were equals in your same social class, and they had the same stuff.
You didn't have it to impress anyone else.
You just had it.
Since World War I, since the 20th century, things have changed.
People have art now to move up in the world socially, to flaunt their wealth, to show what they've got.
And it has not changed.
It's not going to change.
I mean, it's going to keep going like that because, I don't know, Charles Ryskamp said art was a new religion that on Sunday no one went to church anymore.
Everyone went to the museums.
And it's quite true.
Art is the new religion.
But it's got no, but the morals and ethics of art aren't for the people who collect it, they're for the people who create it.
And that's where our society could have run into deep yet.
That's where maybe the religion comes in.
I mean, you know, the people that make this stuff,
They do have to have morals and ethics.
They're not going to create good stuff.
Yeah, I mean, you've got to believe in this stuff.
Right, but for the collectors, it doesn't apply to them.
They don't got it, and they don't have to have it to buy it.
I mean, I don't know if Julian Schnabel is a pretty artist, but people think hundreds of thousands of dollars for his work to say, come on over for dinner on Friday.
Oh, if you happen to
I don't even notice my new schnauble over the dining room table.
I mean, it's a... I hope you notice.
You know, and does that mean, you know, does it mean... I mean, it's an astounding thing.
It's like wearing Gucci loafers and carrying a Vuitton hammer.
It's the same sort of thing.
We live now in this absolutely modern society where there's no small pounds, no...
structure to our society.
The only thing that imparts value or gives structure are things like art and Vuitton bags and Gucci's.
Recognizable wealth.
Recognizable status and show you belong, that show that you're part of a group.
It's amazing.
But like I said, the problem is, if it's the new religion, the problem is that the morals of the new religion only apply to the creators, not to those of them.
So I don't know where it's going to take us in the long run, but I certainly do know that we can all
We can all keep not pandering to the new religion.
I mean, it's... I don't know.
I mean, why do I deal with this stuff?
I have absolutely no creative talent whatsoever.
But I love...
Looking at it.
And I love the intellectual challenge of it.
Did John deal with this stuff?
Never.
You know what?
I've got to get up at 5 a.m., folks.
Okay.
I've got funniest stuff for the moment.
Where are you going back, Priscilla?
Tell me what you think.
I think that when there's enough energy and enough people believing in the energy that they're doing, when there's enough of that, you can't ignore it.
The French can't ignore it.
They look around, they look across the ocean and say, and they see these books and they don't understand them because they're not like what they make.
And they say, what the hell?
I mean, they gotta, they can't ignore it.
And I think that they, I don't know.
They'll probably, they're French.
I mean, they think everything they do is good.
Yeah, yeah.
It's not that they think that this is not good.
Somebody caught up with a lover in Paris.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, these guys don't do this right, they don't do that right, but they probably... They probably screws them up.
What the hell are they doing over there?
Look, I...
Among the big buyers, what do they think?
Well, I sell American findings to European collectors.
And what do they think?
Well, obviously they like them because they're happy to buy them.
Yeah, but they probably buy French findings too.
Yes, but they also buy American.
Well, that's good.
We can explore that.